Legal Basis and Institutional Set-Up

The Presidential Legislative Liaison Office (PLLO) was created by virtue of Memorandum Order No. 128 dated 11 November 1987, as amended by Memorandum Order No. 142 dated 17 December 1987 during the term of President Corazon C. Aquino. The latter issuance made effective Memorandum Order No. 128 on 1 July 1987.

Under the Administration of former President Fidel V. Ramos, several pronouncements were issued that further strengthened the existence of PLLO and compelled a departure from its traditional mould. In particular, during the first plenary conference of the President with the newly elected Senators and Congressmen, attended by Members of the Cabinet held at Malacañang Manila on 22 July 1992, the President formally announced that the PLLO is the agency under the Office of the President that will liaise with Congress regarding all matters impinging on Executive-Legislative relations. . Moreover, in the regular Cabinet Meeting on 28 July 1992, the President gave one of the most significant guiding statements when he announced that the PLLO is the agency under the Office of the President tasked to officially orchestrate the formulation and the shepherding of the President’s Legislative Agenda and all other concerns of the Executive Department having to do with the legislature. This statement, therefore, effectively affirmed the stewardship role of the PLLO over the Legislative Liaison System (LLS), which it had been assuming since the creation of the LLS in 1988 pursuant to Cabinet Resolution No. 16.

In addition, the Head of the PLLO was appointed as Member of the World Trade Organization Advisory and ASEAN Free Trade Advisory Commissions by virtue of Executive Order No. 193 dated 2 August 1994. The PLLO was also included in the membership of the Social Reform Agenda (SRA) Council through Executive Order No. 228 of President Ramos dated 6 March 1995 in order “to ensure immediate and continuing action on the legislative agenda of the SRA.”

During the Estrada Administration, one of President Joseph Estrada’s first official acts was the issuance of Memorandum Order No. 3 dated 3 July 1998, merging the Legislative Affairs Office (LAO) and the PLLO under the administrative and operational jurisdiction of the PLLO headed by the Presidential Adviser on Legislative Affairs, with the rank of Secretary and assisted by two (2) Deputies, one for each Chamber of Congress, with the rank of Undersecretary. With the change, the PLLO assumed the responsibilities of bill drafting, inter-agency consultations, preparation of presidential certification of the urgency of priority bills, the ceremonial signing thereof, up to the furnishing of new enactments to the concerned agencies and the Malacañang Records Office also for publication.

The above functional and structural relationship was sustained under the Macapagal-Arroyo Administration. And the growing reliance on the PLLO and recognition of its strategic significance within the whole bureaucracy was further affirmed by President Gloria Macapagal-Arroyo in two separate meetings of the Cabinet. On 13 March 2001, Her Excellency designated the PLLO as the Cabinet liaison to represent individual executive offices in the Commission on Elections on matters relating to the 14 May 2001 elections. On 02 July 2001, the President designated the PLLO as overall in-charge of the substantive and administrative preparations for the State of the Nation Address (SONA) of the President.

However, the Legislative Secretariat in the Office of the President was abolished by virtue of Executive Order 344, entitled “Creating the Office of the Political Adviser in the Office of the President, Defining its Mandate and Responsibilities, and Creating the Office of Political Coalition Affairs and the Office for Constituency Affairs,” dated 09 August 2004 The Legislative Secretariat’s functions, duties and responsibilities were transferred to the PLLO which together with the Office of Political Coalition Affairs, and the Office for Constituency Affairs were placed under the oversight of the Office of the Political Adviser. Since then,the Presidential Political Adviser along with the Head of PLLO had attended and participated in regular Cabinet meetings and had been actively involved in Inter-Agency Task Forces and Cabinet Clusters such as those involving National Security Council (NSC), the National Economic and Development Authority (NEDA), the National Anti-Poverty Commission (NAPC), among others.

Following the implementation of the rationalization program of the Office of the President, the functions, duties and responsibilities absorbed by the PLLO from the Legislative Affairs Office were reverted to the Legislative Office under the Office of the Deputy Executive Secretary for Legal Affairs (ODESLA).

On 09 March 2010, President Macapagal-Arroyo through Executive Order No. 866, placed the PLLO under the supervision of the Office of the Presidential Adviser for Special Concerns.

Almost one year into the Aquino Administration, a major reorganization of the cabinet cluster system was implemented through Executive Order No. 43 (s. 2011), wherein the PLLO was named as a member of the cluster on Good Governance and Anti-Corruption with the mandate of promoting transparency, accountability, participatory governance and strengthening of public institutions. This cluster, together with the other four cabinet clusters created under said executive order, namely: Human Development and Poverty Reduction; Economic Development; Security, Justice and Peace; and Climate Change Adaptation and Mitigation, serve as the primary mechanism of the Executive Branch for directing all efforts towards the realization of the Social Contract with the Filipino People.

Under the current Duterte Administration, Executive Order No. 43 (s. 2011) was repealed by Executive Order No. 24 dated 16 May 2017 entitled, “Reorganizing the Cabinet Cluster System by Integrating Good Governance and Anti-Corruption in the Policy Frameworks of All the Clusters and Creating the Infrastructure Cluster and Participatory Governance Cluster.” The Presidential Adviser on Legislative Affairs who is concurrently the Head of the PLLO was appointed as Member of the Participatory Governance Cluster. The said Order provides that, “The Participatory Governance Cluster shall exert all efforts to enhance citizen participation in governmental processes. In particular, the following goals shall be pursued:

Formulate mechanisms to enable the public to properly understand, rationalize and implement national government programs and projects based on area specific realities;
Strengthen consultation mechanisms to ensure effective implementation of national programs and projects in the local government and grassroots level; and
Propose policies, programs and projects that would foster participatory governance and build the capacities of local government units for such purpose.”
PLLO is also a member of four other clusters, to wit:

Infrastructure cluster;
Human Development and Poverty Reduction cluster;
Climate Change Adaptation and Mitigation and Disaster Risk Reduction cluster; and
Economic Development cluster.
In charge of managing a network of legislative liaison officers from various departments and agencies that compose the Legislative Liaison System, the PLLO orchestrates collaborative activities with Congress aimed at forming a stronger Executive-Legislative tactical alliance. The PLLO also assists the President in the formulation of appropriate policy responses. It also conducts consultations with various sectors of society purposely to encourage the private sector to take part in a meaningful collaboration in government policy-making.

The PLLO continues to serve as technical advisor to the Legislative-Executive Development Advisory Council (LEDAC) particularly in the formulation and shepherding of the shared policy reform priorities of the two branches of government under a Common Legislative Agenda. The PLLO coordinates with the LEDAC secretariat and supervises its regular meetings. It maintains its active participation in the round table discussions on national security and defense issues with the NSC, and on multi-sectoral legislative policy issues on human development with the NAPC.

In the current Administration, PLLO has also taken a pro-active stance in promoting the move to amend the Constitution and the shift to Federalism. In a communication dated April 4, 2018, Executive Secretary Salvador C. Medialdea designated Secretary Adelino B. Sitoy as OBSERVER in the proceedings of the Consultative Commission (ConComm) to Review the 1987 Constitution. Subsequently, Secretary Sitoy had submitted his written comments and observations to the Office of the Executive Secretary. Likewise, the PLLO has been conducting several Federalism fora all over the country, engaging various stakeholders since 2017.

Mandate

The PLLO is tasked to officially orchestrate the formulation of the Executive-Legislative Agenda and all other concerns of the Executive Department having to do with Legislation and see these concerns through the various processes. It is mandated to promote the presidential legislative initiatives and other Administration-sponsored priority policy reforms and development programs through a strategic information dissemination campaign and sustained day-to-day collaboration with the two Chambers of Congress (at both personal and institutional levels), as well as with other interest groups and generate maximum support for the President.

Functions

In line with the above mandate, the PLLO undertakes the following functions:

Advises the President on all matters pertaining to legislation and Executive-Legislative relationship by managing the President’s day-to-day relations with individual members of Congress, including Executive-Legislative dialogues / conferences and other Presidential activities requiring the participation of Congressional members;
Handles all tasks to promote the President’s Legislative Agenda – from bill drafting to inter-agency consultations, legislative research, advocacy and conflict resolutions, preparation of Presidential urgent certification of priority bills up to the ceremonial signing of the same;
Oversees the confirmation by the Commission on Appointments (CA) of presidential appointees to the Cabinet;
Conducts political analyses through voting patterns and the like that serve as bases for facilitating relationships and the formulation of policies and implementation thereof;
Provides mechanisms for effective exchange of information/ consultation/coordination among the Executive departments, agencies and instrumentalities on the one hand with Congress and other interest groups on the other;
Coordinates with all government bodies, whenever necessary, to ensure consistency of the Administration’s legislative proposals with existing programs;
Consolidates Congress’ and other interest groups’ support for Presidential initiatives;
Performs oversight, monitoring and other functions for the President’s and the Cabinet’s legislative agenda and implementation of new laws; and
Monitors and informs the President daily of the progress of all Administration bills and other measures affecting the Presidency, existing government programs and other over-all government machinery.
The PLLO maintains “strategic coordinating posts” in the Malacañang, in the Senate and in the House of Representatives to ensure effective and efficient advocacy of official party lines, to monitor the progress of Administration measures and to advise the President and concerned executive departments/offices of relevant developments in Congress. With its three office stations, the PLLO has a total of 39 plantilla positions (per approved Rationalization Plan dated 07 May 2013; NOSCA Serial Nos. 0002017-05-024 dated May 31, 2017 and 0002018-07-017 dated July 27, 2018) that includes the PLLO Head and three Undersecretaries, each heading the PLLO stations in the Malacañang, in the Senate and in the House of Representatives