The Presidential Legislative Liaison Office (PLLO) has established, documented, maintained and continually improved a Quality Management System that ensures that the formulation and the shepherding of the President’s Legislative Agenda and all other concerns of the Executive Department having to do with the legislature that it officially orchestrates conform to the expectations of the Office of the President.

The Quality Management System is documented into three parts, namely:

Quality Manual, which describes the quality management system of The Presidential Legislative Liaison Office (PLLO)
Procedures and Work Instruction Manual, which specify the detailed activities of the various processes covered based on the scope of its Quality Management System
Support documents such as forms
Scope

The scope of the Quality Management System of the Presidential Legislative Liaison Office (PLLO) is the PROVISION OF LEGISLATIVE MONITORING & FEEDBACK. Execution of the said core process is located at the three sites, namely: (1) 2nd Floor Annex, New Executive Bldg., Malacañang, Manila, (2) Rm. 417, GSIS Bldg., Financial Center, Roxas Blvd., Pasay City, and (3) 3rd Floor Main Building House of Representatives, Batasan Complex, Batasan Hills, Quezon City.

Likewise, relevant support processes needed to ensure continuous operation of the aforesaid core process are included in the scope of the QMS.

Because of the nature and type of the current structure, the following are ISO 9001:2015 clauses are not applicable to the agency:

7.1.5 (Monitoring & Measuring Resources) – since the agency does not own or maintain any measuring tools relevant to monitoring its processes
8.3 (Design & Development) – since the agency is not involved in any design activity of its service.
To promote commitment to quality throughout all the processes covered in the scope of its QMS.
To provide an overview that demonstrates the ability of the Presidential Legislative Liaison Office (PLLO)’s relevant processes to operate the Quality Management System to meet client requirements.
To define and clarify responsibilities to various quality functions.
Confidentiality and Distribution of the Quality Manual

The Quality Manual is a controlled document and should not be removed from the agency premises without prior authorization from management.

Controlled copies of the manual are issued to individuals with management responsibilities who are responsible for the safekeeping of the copies. This is to ensure also the prompt and accurate entry of any amendment and addition to the manual.

Copies of the Quality Manual cannot be reproduced or distributed to customers and other entities unless otherwise, approved by the management.

The reader of the Manual acknowledges that the information provided in this Quality Manual is confidential; therefore the reader agrees not to disclose the content of this Manual.